---
layout: post
title: First Book After University - The Clean Coder by Robert C. Martin
---

When I finished university I wanted to ensure I continued my professional development especially now that I was a professional. During university I had purchased Clean Code by Robert C. Martin for myself which I found great for improving my code style. Therefore since I enjoyed that book so much and for a bit of a break from code styles I ordered The Clean Coder also by Martin.

Before ordering this book I read many reviews on Amazon especially as it was slightly lower rated than Clean Code. Reading those reviews gave a pretty accurate picture of the book as they warned of the parts in which Martin was quite opinionated and many people may disagree with. A major concern to some people is his expectation on at least 20 hours a week of professional development outside of work in order to consider yourself a professional. This certainly seemed like quite a bit to me but luckily that didn’t stop me from getting the book as I learned a very important lesson from that section.

The 20 hours a week made me feel like I would need to give up a huge amount of my family and social life. However, the 20 hours isn’t without reason and Martin gives some helpful advice on how to achieve it. The most life changing for me was podcasts. I had never really listened to podcasts never mind technical ones but it made so much sense. It was something I could do when I commuted to work therefore requiring 0 extra time. Well not actually 0 as some time is required to select podcasts but in the long run I consider it negligible. Speaking of long runs that is the other primary time I listen which also isn't costing extra time. Even better it makes fitness more appealing as I know it is helping my professional development at the same time.

Another section I learned from is the importance of committing to something. At work we plan our work in an Agile manner using sprints. Our estimates are quite often quite far off in that we only accomplish a small fraction of what we planned. These commitments definitely weren’t as important as the ones Martin talked about but regardless they were terribly inaccurate and interfered with proper planning. I endeavoured to make my predictions more accurate. At first when I gave some higher than expected estimates I felt some pressure to reduce them. This pressure would have been really easy to give in to as I knew I wouldn’t be bothered much if I didn’t finish in that time as that was a pretty common occurrence in our sprints for the whole team. However I stuck with my estimates at first. Later on though I realized it wasn’t the time estimates that were the problem but that the scope of the problem was unclear. People on our team were often doing what they thought was the scope of the story in near the allocated time only then afterwards finding out that there was quite a bit more that other wanted. I’m proud to have helped in shifting our team to try to make smaller issues and ensure we do a better job at defining them by aiming to have a clear description and test criteria to know when the issue has been resolved. Test criteria isn’t something we used in the past and it still doesn’t always appear in each issue but we are improving on our use of it and the clarity of the scope of our stories and the accuracy of our estimates has improved in turn.
